Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral
Agents
Aleks Knoks1[0000−0001−8384−0328] and Marija Slavkovik2[0000−0003−2548−8623]
1 University of Luxembourg, 2, place de l’Université, L-4365, Esch-sur-Alzette,
Luxembourg
aleks.knoks@uni.lu
2 University of Bergen, Fosswinckelsgt. 6, 5007 Bergen, Norway
marija.slavkovik@uib.no
Abstract. The overlapping disciplines of machine ethics and value align-
ment are concerned with designing artificial agents that are aligned with
human values and that act in ethically acceptable ways. A recent trend
in these disciplines is the use of reinforcement learning (RL) to design
such agents, sidelining the philosophical literature that used to play a
more central role. Against this backdrop, this paper pursues two goals.
The first is to draw out ideas from recent work in metanormative theory
that can be useful for designing artificial moral and value-aligned agents.
The second is to examine the RL architecture through the lens of these
ideas. This will give us clearer criteria for when an RL agent’s behavior
can be classified as moral, as well as a basis for evaluating and comparing
different RL-based approaches to machine ethics and value alignment.
Keywords: Machine ethics · Metanormative theory · Reinforcement
learning · Value alignment.
1
Introduction
In artificial intelligence (AI), an intelligent agent is classically understood as
an entity that can perceive its environment and act upon that environment
by taking actions toward achieving a goal [38]. In reinforcement learning (RL),
intelligent agents take actions in a dynamic environment to maximize a reward
signal [44]. After the training phase, an RL agent will typically have learned
the strategy that maximizes this signal, and if all goes well, thereby also have
learned how to achieve the user-specified goal. RL agents are thus designed to be
rational in the narrow sense of being maximally efficient in achieving explicitly
specified goals. But the more autonomy agents have and the wider their abilities,
the more important it is for them to be capable of behavior and reasoning that is
not only narrowly rational but also morally acceptable [13, 14]. In other words, it
is at times important that AI agents, including RL agents, are also moral agents.
Floridi and Sanders define an agent as a “system [that is] situated within and
[is also] a part of an environment, which initiates a transformation, produces
an effect or exerts power on [the environment]” [19, p. 357]. They further define
arXiv:2608.08220v1  [cs.AI]  8 Aug 2026


2
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
moral agents as those that are “capable of morally qualifiable actions. . . or actions
that can cause moral good or evil” (p. 364). Given these definitions, RL agents
are well-positioned to qualify as moral agents.
One might be hesitant to accept Floridi and Sanders’ definition—thinking,
perhaps, that it overgeneralizes to even low-level animals and that agents whom
we cannot hold responsible for their actions do not deserve the label ‘moral
agents’. Nevertheless, one should recognize that even highly rudimentary agents
can have both harmful and beneficial effects on people, and that we can mean-
ingfully qualify (or assess) the actions of such agents as harmful and beneficial.
And one should also recognize that it is in our best interests to ensure that
rudimentary agents that can have harmful and beneficial effects on people are
designed in such a way that their harmful effects are minimized and their ben-
eficial effects are maximized. This is to say that Floridi and Sanders’ definition
of moral agents is best seen as stipulative.
In any event, it invites two difficult engineering questions: (1) How are we
to operationalize the notions of moral evil and moral good (or harmful and
beneficial effects)? (2) And how are we to actually design agents that avoid
moral evil and foster moral good?
These questions are not new, as evidenced by the early work in machine ethics
[3, 49]. What is new, however, is the developing research trend that attempts to
answer both of these questions using the familiar tools of RL, typically overlook-
ing work in moral philosophy and philosophical work more generally. The line
of thought underlying this trend appears to run roughly as follows. Moral good
and evil are nothing but further user-specified goals, and insofar as they are such
goals, in an RL architecture they can be expressed using a separate reward func-
tion or combined with other user-specified goals into one overall reward function.
Once this is done, standard RL techniques can be used to ensure that RL agents
are moral. This is a sensible line of thought. However, it is also very general,
and so it is no surprise that the research trend manifests itself as a wide array
of very different proposals on how to use RL in the context of machine ethics,
value alignment, and related areas. Furthermore, the criteria for classifying the
behavior of RL agents as moral or value-aligned are not always clear.
Against this backdrop, this paper has two main goals. The first is to draw
out some ideas from recent theoretical work in philosophy that can help us take
important steps toward answering the above Questions (1) and (2). These ideas
come from the field of philosophy called “metanormative theory” that is con-
cerned with foundational questions about the nature of normativity and the
structure of normative domains (including morality). The second goal is to ex-
amine the general architecture of an RL agent through the lens of these ideas.
The hope is that this will give us clear criteria for when an RL agent’s behavior
can be classified as moral, as well as a sound basis for evaluating and comparing
different RL-based approaches to machine ethics and value alignment.
Thus, we take the main contribution of this paper to consist in making
some central insights from metanormative theory available to AI researchers
working in machine ethics and value alignment, as well as illustrating how these


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
3
insights can be used to evaluate approaches that rely on RL. The structure of
the rest of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a quick review of the
research areas that are most relevant to our purposes. Sections 3–4 present the
ideas from metanormative theory that strike us as most relevant for designing
artificial moral and value-aligned agents. Section 5 explains how these ideas apply
to the standard RL architecture. Section 6 zooms in on three specific proposals
for using RL in the design of value-aligned agents. Finally, Section 7 concludes.
2
Background
This section provides a snapshot of (1) machine ethics and value alignment; (2)
metanormative theory; and (3) RL. It also briefly comments on the way these
areas relate and distinguishes the perspective we take in this paper from the
perspective of the normative multiagent systems (NorMAS) community.
Machine Ethics and Value Alignment. The discipline of machine ethics is
concerned with the behavior of machines toward people and other machines [3].
Since its inception, the field has been concerned with building artificial moral
agents [50], and it seems fair to say that it has been dominated by logic-based
methods [7]. Machine ethics has conventionally drawn on ideas from moral phi-
losophy, with its many attempts to operationalize various ethical theories, in-
cluding utalitarianism, Kantian deontology, and virtue ethics—see, e.g. [4, Part
IV]. Value alignment is concerned with ensuring that the behavior of machines is
aligned with human values [20, 24]. Clearly, there is an overlap between the con-
cerns of the two disciplines. Although their ostensible focuses and terminology
are different, it remains to be seen whether there are any fundamental disagree-
ments. Where disciplines may differ is their relation to moral philosophy, with
machine ethics often focused on designing agents that align with particular moral
theories, and value alignment less so [52]. Although the value alignment litera-
ture does not see itself as concerned with the design of artificial moral agents,
from the perspective of machine ethics, a machine that is aligned with human
values would qualify as an artificial moral agent.
Metanormative Theory. The label ‘metanormative’ generalizes the more
familiar ‘metaethics’ [26]. It is standard to distinguish first-order ethics from
metaethics—see any good textbook, such as [25] or [42]. The former is concerned
with substantive accounts of moral rightness, wrongness, goodness, badness, and
the like, and is exemplified by such well-known ethical theories as utilitarianism,
Kantian deontology, and virtue ethics. The latter explores the presuppositions
of first-order ethical theories, as well as our moral discourse and practice [39].
The work in metanormative theory is motivated by the observation that moral-
ity is not the only normative domain and the conviction that it is worthwhile to
ask domain-neutral questions about basic normative concepts, categories, and
their relationships [26]. Thus, metanormative theory can be characterized as the


4
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
philosophical discipline that focuses on the presuppositions of normative theories
(pertaining to moral philosophy, epistemology, practical rationality, and other
areas of normative inquiry), as well as our everyday normative talk and practice.
While work in machine ethics and, to a lesser degree, value alignment draws
on insights from first-order ethical theories, there has not been much overlap
between these disciplines and metanormative theory. One noteworthy exception
are approaches that appeal to the notion of (normative) reasons, see [2, 12, 18].
As we are going to see, this notion plays crucial roles in metanormative theory.
Reinforcement Learning. In an RL setting, we consider an agent interacting
with a specified environment. The environment is typically modeled as a state
transition system. A state is represented by a set of variables (or propositions)
whose values jointly determine the state of the environment. Depending on the
setting, states may be fully or only partially observable to the agent. At each
step, the agent selects one of a set of available actions, each of which may, with a
certain probability, cause a transition to a new state. In the standard formulation,
the environment is modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP), meaning that
the probability distribution over the next state depends only on the current state
and the action chosen by the agent. The agent explores the environment with the
aim of learning an optimal policy, that is, a mapping from states to actions that
maximizes the expected cumulative reward. The resulting policy is intended to
produce the desired behavior as specified by the reward signal. It is learned by
optimizing this reward signal using a particular learning algorithm. There are
numerous learning algorithms that an RL agent can use to find an optimal policy.
What they have in common is that they guide the agent through trial-and-error
interactions to learn the reward signal of each state-action transition.
The reward signal can have a positive or a negative value—in the latter case
it is a penalty. In a standard RL setting, the reward signal is assumed to be
provided by the environment. Formally, it is the output of a reward function
that assigns reward values based on the current state, the action taken, and the
resulting state. Reward functions can be learned or engineered [17]. While in
the standard RL, the agent learns the reward function, in Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (IRL) [31], it starts out knowing the optimal policy and uses a learning
algorithm to learn the reward function that would yield this policy.
In sum, an RL scenario consists of a set of states, a set of actions available
to the agent, a reward function (which may have an internal structure), and a
learning algorithm that aims to identify an optimal policy.
The RL community is increasingly recognizing the need to train agents that
accomplish their goals in an ethical and safe way – see [48]. But while its interest
in ensuring that RL agents learn “moral policies” is increasing, the same cannot
be said of its interest in moral (and other relevant areas of) philosophy. Thus,
the standard approach to ensuring that the behavior of RL agents is “moral” is,
in effect, to simply let humans train them or provide feedback on their behavior,
without engaging with the questions of whether the training process is appro-
priate and whether the human-provided information is suitable. Conitzer et al.


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
5
[15] suggest that RLHF is growing to be the dominant approach here. However,
they also admit that, despite its advantages, this approach faces some impor-
tant challenges. We highlight two: the trained agent’s moral behavior cannot be
reproduced in new environments; and the agent is not capable of any real jus-
tification of its decisions, beyond the uninformative “it maximized the reward”.
Here we note that, while we may readily accept “I thought it was the right thing
to do” from a person who serves us vegan lunch, we would be less ready to take
an artificial agent’s word for it: what is good enough when it comes from people
is often not when it comes from machines [21].
Given this, we think it would be helpful to have clearer criteria for classifying
an RL agent’s behavior as moral. We also think that, given RL architecture, the
moral status of an RL agent’s behavior must ultimately depend on the moral sta-
tus of some of the following: states; actions; reward signals; learning algorithms;
and policies. To understand how to think about the moral status of these, we
turn to metanormative theory. Before doing that, however, we distinguish our
perspective from that of another related field.
Norms and Normative Multi-Agent Systems. Normative multi-agent sys-
tems (NorMAS) is the field that studies how rules, norms, and social expectations
shape the behavior of multiple interacting agents. Specifically it is concerned
with the representation and implementation of norms and the management of
violations of norms in multi-agent system contexts, as well as the problem of en-
abling computational agents to reason with norms. While there is a connection
between NorMAS, on the one hand, and machine ethics and value alignment,
on the other, their focuses are different. For one, whereas NorMAS is concerned
with the coordination among many agents using norms, machine ethics and value
alignment typically focus on an individual agent. For another, there is also an
important sense in which the scope of NorMAS is broader than that of machine
ethics and value alignment, as the norms and rules it works with need not be
moral or reflect human values. There are further differences too.
NorMAS methods can be, and have been, used to further the goals of machine
ethics and value alignment. Typically this means starting with a set of norms
that are stipulated to be moral, to be a kind of heuristic for moral values—here
see [30]—or to reflect human values, and then studying agents that reason with
these norms and try to comply with them. In this setup, it is very natural to call
an agent’s behavior “moral” insofar as it complies with the given set of norms and
“immoral” insofar as it does not, and so we have clear criteria. It bears emphasis
that, in this paper, we are not presupposing that we are in a NorMAS setup,
and that it is, at the very least, not obvious that the NorMAS setup reflects the
perspective of metanormative theory on morality and other normative domains.
3
Normative categories
The goal of this and the following section is to introduce the ideas from metanor-
mative theory that, we think, should be in the toolbox of those working in ma-


6
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
chine ethics and value alignment. Although we present a fairly standard take on
these ideas, it should be kept in mind that there is much disagreement among
metanormative theorists, and that our presentation is deliberately simplified.
Consider an agent taking a decision in some morally sensitive situation. For
example, the agent might be deciding between buying a plane ticket or donating
the money to Doctors Without Borders. There are many ways of conceptualizing
the situation. However, we should agree on the following two minimal constraints
that any sensible conceptualization must satisfy. First, there has to be some
standard applying to the actions that the agent can perform or to the states of
affairs that the agent can bring about in the situation. We get at this standard by
using normative vocabulary. For example, we could describe some action/state
of affairs using the terms ‘right’, ‘good’, or ‘appropriate’, and another using the
terms ‘wrong’, ‘bad’, and ‘inappropriate’. Second, any sensible conceptualization
of the situation has to distinguish between the features of the situation that are
morally relevant from the features that are not. For example, the fact that there
are people dying in need of a doctor is, intuitively, morally relevant, while the
facts that the doctors are on average 179cm tall and have brown eyes are not.
Presumably, there is a tight relation between the morally relevant factors and the
standard that applies to actions/states of affairs, but what exactly this relation is
is less clear. Ideally, the conceptualization of the situation would make it explicit.
As mentioned, we use a plethora of normative vocabulary to talk about
morally sensitive situations—and normatively sensitive situations more gener-
ally. The literature in metanormative theory has done a lot to identify and
classify the normative categories this vocabulary picks out.3
Right, Wrong, and Other Deontic Categories. Two of the most important
normative categories are right and wrong. For simplicity, we can think of a
normatively sensitive situation as involving a set of exclusive and exhaustive
actions available to the agent. Then the categories of right and wrong can be
thought of as properties of the agent’s actions. Also, notice that every action is
either right or wrong, and that no action can be both right and wrong.4
Right and wrong are the paradigm examples from the class of what the
literature calls “deontic categories”. This class also includes required, obligatory,
forbidden, prohibited, permissible, optional, and their many cognates. Deontic
categories are also often picked out using terms such as ‘ought to’, ‘must’, ‘may’,
and others. The deontic categories form a class because they resemble each other
in several ways and because they are related to each other in ways that they are
not related to nondeontic normative categories, cf. [9].
3 The question of what distinguishes normative from nonnormative categories is a
difficult philosophical question. However, most of us have no trouble identifying
normative categories using a kind of “I know it when I see it” test.
4 To be more precise, no action can be right and wrong, unless it is right in some
respect and wrong in another, or an action’s rightness and wrongness are associated
with different normative domains. We discuss the qualifier “in a respect” and different
normative domains in more detail in Section 4.


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
7
Table 1. Differences between the deontic and the evaluative categories.
Good/Bad
Right/Wrong
Gradability
gradable
not gradable
Neutral state
allow neutral states
no neutral states
Privativity
nonprivative opposites
privative opposites
Duality
not duals
duals (of each other)
Alternatives depend on alternatives do not depend on alternatives
Good, Bad, and Other Evaluative Categories. In addition to the paradigm
categories good and bad, the class of evaluative categories also includes neutral
(or indifferent), better than, worse than, at least as good as, no worse than, weakly
best, strongly worst, and many others. While some of these are naturally thought
of as properties of actions available to the agent, others are relations between
the available actions. Like the deontic categories, the evaluative categories form
a class because they resemble each other in crucial ways. Berker [9] lists five fea-
tures that distinguish evaluative categories from deontic ones. Table 1 illustrates
these features by way of contrasting the categories good and bad with those of
right and wrong. Notice that ‘evaluative’ is a cognate of ‘value(s)’, and so that
the evaluative categories can make the rather ambiguous notion of value—which,
we submit, is overused in the ethics of AI and value AI literature—more precise.
Justified, Unjustified, and Other Fittingness Categories. The third class
comprises fittingness categories, which include such categories as (in)appropriate,
(un)fitting, (un)warranted, (un)justified, (im)proper, and many others. Until re-
cently, it was not common to separate fittingness categories as a distinct class
from both deontic and evaluative categories. However, recent years have seen
increased interest in fittingness, with some authors going as far as to argue that
fittingness categories are more fundamental than the categories belonging to
other classes–see, e.g. [22, 23, 28, 29]. We can think of fittingness categories as
applying, in the first instance, to an agent’s responses in normatively sensitive
situations. McHugh and Way’s [29] preferred phrase for describing fittingness
categories is “getting things right”. Note that a fitting response is meant to be
different from a response that we would classify as right. Consider the example
again: An agent who responds to the situation by donating the money to Doc-
tors Without Borders because people are dying gets things right, while an agent
who responds to the situation by either buying a plane ticket or by donating the
money because most doctors have brown eyes, or because it makes the agent look
good, does not get things right. The fittingness categories share some features
with the deontic categories and others with the evaluative ones, cf. [9].
Reason-Related Categories. The fourth class consists of categories that con-
cern (normative) reasons. Examples include being a reason for, being a reason
against, having decisive reason to, being reasonable, and a sequence of others. The
categories being a reason for and being a reason against are the most important


8
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
ones on the list. They are closely tied to what is called “(dis)favoring relation”
[40]. Thus, we can say that the fact that people are dying is a reason to donate
or that it favors donating to Doctors Without Borders. It is almost universally
agreed that the (dis)favoring relation is gradable, and that one reason can favor
an action more than some other reason favors another action, cf. [27, 45].
If normatively sensitive situations ar thought of as involving a set of actions
the agent can perform, it should be clear that the categories being a reason
for and being a reason against are very different from deontic, evaluative, and
fittingness categories: they are not properties of actions, they are not relations
between actions, and they are not naturally thought of as properties of agents’
responses to situations. Rather, it seems to be most natural to think of them as
picking out some relata of the actions available to the agent, and it is tempting
to identify reasons with the normatively relevant features of situations, or at
least a subset of such features. The categories of being a reason for/against
play a central role metanormative theory. We illustrate this with two examples.
First, it is widely accepted that they, along with some core deontic categories,
are all we need to adequately capture the common structure of most (if not all)
first-order ethical theories [8, 33, 45]. Once the common structure is identified,
the substantive disagreements between these theories concern the features or
facts that are identified as reasons. Second, there is the influential “reasons first
program”, the proponents of which hold that the notion of reason is basic and
that other normative notions are to be analyzed in its terms [16, 33, 34, 40, 41].
Whiting’s [51] list of roles that reasons play in our normative theorizing and
practices is also noteworthy. First, there is the explanatory role: reasons explain
such things as why a person ought to, may, or must act. Second, there is the
justificatory role: reasons justify (support, defend) actions, as well as serve as
considerations that a person (or any agent) might cite in justifying their actions
or another’s actions. And finally, there is the guiding role: one agent can point
to a reason to guide another agent’s action. Reasons can also guide action by
figuring in a person’s reasoning. (See [51, p. 14ff].)
Further categories. The above four classes of categories have received the
most attention in metanormative theory. But there are at least two others: the
first is comprised of categories that have to do with virtue and vice; the second
with categories relating to responsibility, blame- and praiseworthiness. They are
sometimes called, respectively, the “aretaic” and “hypological categories”. Al-
though these categories are important, they seem to us to be of less direct
relevance for the concerns of machine ethics and value alignment. Also, some
authors hold that the latter class is a subset of that of fittingness—see e.g. [9].
4
Some Further Central Notions
Having laid out the most important normative categories, we discuss some fur-
ther ideas and distinctions from metanormative theory which, we think, should
be on the radar of those working in machine ethics and value alignment.


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
9
Different Normative Domains. In both everyday talk and research contexts,
the actions agents take are sometimes described as “moral” and “immoral”, or
“ethical” and “unethical”. Notice that these phrases are elliptical, saying that
the actions in question are morally right, morally good, morally wrong or some
such. Notice also that it is easy to think of situations in which one and the same
action taken by the agent is both legally right and prudentially right, but morally
wrong. This suggests that the use of ‘moral’ and ‘immoral’ signals that normative
categories can pertain to different normative domains—also called “normative
perspectives” [45] or “normative systems” [27]—and this is the standard view
in metanormative theory. It bears emphasis that the moral domain is often
juxtaposed to the prudential domain or the domain of self-interest, which is
concerned with an individual’s own well-being, interests, and flourishing.
Overall vs. Contributory. Metanormative theory standardly distinguishes
between overall and contributory categories. A normative category is overall just
in case it reflects all the normatively relevant features of the situation and the
final assessment of the situation, and it is contributory just in case it contributes
to this final assessment but does not by itself deliver it.
The relation between the overall/contributory distinction and the four classes
of normative categories is not perfectly straightforward. Reading some papers
in metanormative theory leaves one with the impression that these distinctions
completely cross-cut each other; reading others, with the impression that the re-
lation between them is more structured. We will not attempt to settle these dif-
ferences. For our purposes, it suffices that we acknowledge the significance of the
distinction and recognize the paradigm examples of each. Thus, the core reason-
based categories being a reason for and being a reason against are paradigm
cases of contributory categories, and the deontic categories required, permissible,
and right are clearly overall categories, cf. [27].
The overall/contributory distinction can be illustrated with the help of a
staple example from [43]: You can either keep your promise to meet your friend
for dinner or save a drowning child from certain death. In this situation, it is
overall right for you to save the child. It is (overall) required that you save
the child and it is (overall) impermissible that you meet your friend for dinner
instead. It is also (overall) good for you to save the child, and it is (overall)
unjustified for you to meet the friend for dinner. Turning to the contributory
categories now, the fact that the child is in mortal danger is clearly a reason for
you to save her. Presumably, this reason also goes a long way toward explaining
the presence of the above overall categories in this situation, that is, why it is
impermissible and unjustified for you to meet the friend, letting the child die,
and why it is (overall) good for you to save the child. However, notice that there
is also a reason for you to meet your friend for dinner: the fact that you gave her
a promise has not disappeared. While this reason gets outweighed by the other
one, it can still figure in explanations of various sorts of thing we might want to
say about the situation. For example, it can be used in an explanation of why
you feel that you need to apologize to your friend even if you did what was right.


10
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
The Qualifier “In a Respect”. Notice that many of the terms that we use
to pick out both evaluative and deontic categories can be qualified with the
phrase “in a respect”. Taking this at face value might lead us to conclude that
the qualified terms pick out contributory versions of the respective categories.
With this, we could say that the fact that you will have kept your promise by
meeting the friend in the above situation makes this action good in a respect
and that the fact that you will have let the child die makes this action bad in a
respect. Similarly, we could say that the action in question is right in one respect
and wrong in another. Most metanormative theorists readily accept qualified
versions of evaluative categories, while only a small fraction of them accept
qualified versions of the deontic ones—see [51] and the response in [26].
The Qualifier “All-Things-Considered”. In the philosophical literature, nor-
mative terms are also sometimes qualified with the phrase “all-things-considered”.
This can mean one of two things. First, the phrase can be used synonymously
with “overall”. Second, it can signal—as it does in the context of the debate
over whether there is an “all-things-considered ought” or “ought simpliciter” [6,
11]—that the term picks out a normative category that reflects a perspective of
not a single normative domain, but, rather, the perspective of all (relevant) nor-
mative domains. Thus, just as the overall moral categories are meant to reflect
a perspective that takes into account all morally relevant features of the situa-
tion, the all-things-considered categories, in the sense in question, are meant to
reflect a perspective that takes into account all normatively relevant features of
the situation, that is, morally relevant features, prudentially relevant features, as
well as others. Whether such an all-encompassing normative perspective exists
is controversial, as the differences in the positions of [5] and [11] illustrate.
Normative Explanation and Justification. Although the field of AI has not
converged on how to define ‘explanation’ and ‘justification’, the following passage
from a survey article reflects the way many AI researchers think about them: “A
key component of an artificially intelligent system is the ability to explain the
decisions, recommendations, predictions, or actions made by it and the process
through which they are made. Explanation is closely related to the concept of
interpretability: systems are interpretable if their operations can be understood
by a human, either through introspection or through a produced explanation. A
related concept is justification: intuitively, a justification explains why a decision
is a good one, but may or may not do so by explaining how it was made” [10, p.
8].
Metanormative theory also often touches on issues pertaining to normative
explanation and justification, although these notions are rarely central. Väry-
nen’s recent work, [46, 47], is a welcome exception, and so we focus on it. Follow-
ing [46], we can think of normative explanations as explanations of why things
(understood broadly to include facts and actions) have the normative features
they do, or why they fall under certain normative categories. Thus, we can think
of normative explanations as (veridical) answers to why-questions about norma-


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
11
tive categories in particular situations, that is, such questions as: Why is saving
the child the best you can do? Why is it overall right for you to donate to Doc-
tors Without Borders? And why is the fact that people are dying a reason to
donate to Doctors Without Borders?
Notice that the first two questions concern overall categories, while the third
concerns a contributory one. Metanormative theorists agree that the general
shape of answers to questions about the overall normative categories is fun-
damentally different from the general shape of answers to questions about the
contributory ones. The general idea is roughly that the first kind of question
needs to be answered by appeal to contributory normative categories, whereas
answers to the latter kind of question need to appeal to substantive (normative)
first-order theories. To illustrate, a successful answer to the question of why it is
overall right for you to donate to Doctors Without Borders might point to the
fact that people are dying. An adequate answer to the question of why the fact
that people are dying is a reason to donate to Doctors Without Borders would
need to appeal to something more substantial, such as bad consequences along
utalitarian lines or failure to respect dignity along Kantian lines. It is impor-
tant to notice here that the answer to the first question is perfectly compatible
with either of the two fundamentally different answers to the latter question.
This observation points to an idea that is widely agreed upon in metanormative
theory: in many cases, the explanations of facts that concern overall normative
categories are relatively independent of those that concern the contributory ones.
So, when it comes to normative explanations, we see a kind of division of labor.
Turning to justification, we note that ‘justification’ is a cognate of ‘justified’,
and that (un)justified is a fittingness category. As a fittingness category, it has to
do with responses and, more specifically, with responses that “get things right”.
So, justification is, roughly, what makes certain responses of the kind that get
things right. Väyrynen’s [46] thinking of justification as taking actions, attitudes,
policies, norms, and such as their objects is well in line with this.
Zooming out, we derive two conclusions from Sections 3 and 4:
– Any use of moral vocabulary (e.g. ‘moral’ and ‘ethical’) to describe AI agents
and their behavior must bottom out in terms of moral categories, that is,
normative categories pertaining to the moral domain. Similarly, any talk
about values in AI should be made precise in terms of normative categories.
– We should welcome those approaches to machine ethics and value alignment
that can deliver explanations and justifications of facts that concern overall
categories in terms of contributory ones (e.g. core reason-based categories).
5
RL Setup in Terms of Normative Categories
The main goal of this section is to explore how the normative categories from
Section 3 apply to the general RL setup. We will look at some concrete proposals
for using RL in the context of machine ethics and value alignment in Section 6.
It will be instructive to start by thinking of RL agents not against the back-
drop of a moral standard (and moral categories), but against the backdrop of


12
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
the standard of self-interest or prudence. In textbook presentations of RL, the
user-specified goal is often presented as the RL agent’s own, and the agent is
presented as maximizing its own reward signal. For illustrative purposes, we take
such descriptions at face value, as they give us a meaningful normative domain
in an RL setup.
Now we turn to the task of exploring how the normative categories apply in
such a setup: a classical RL system with the reward function representing the
agent’s self-interest. Of all the elements of an RL system, the prime candidates
for normative qualification are these three: (1) state-action pairs; (2) policies;
(3) reward signals.
Each state-action pair in an RL system is associated with a reward signal.
This signal provides one straightforward way to make sense of state-action pairs
in terms of core evaluative categories. Thus, a state-action pair is good (for the
RL agent) if the corresponding reward signal is positive, bad (for the RL agent)
if the signal is negative, and neutral otherwise. Clearly, we can also use the
reward function to compare state-action pairs. So, it is meaningful to say that
some of them are better, while others are worse. We can also contrast this local
sense of ‘good’, ‘bad’, ‘better’, and ‘worse’ with a more global one that can be
identified against the backdrop of optimal policy. Thus, there is a clear sense in
which a locally bad state-action pair can nevertheless be good (for the agent)
more globally, that is, if it is a part of the optimal policy. The optimal policy
also makes for the most natural reference point for qualifying state-action pairs
in terms of deontic categories, even though this might sound less natural here.
Thus, we can say that a state-action pair is right (for the agent) and that it ought
to be taken (given the agent’s self-interest) insofar as it is part of the optimal
policy. Similarly, we can make sense of state-action pairs in terms of fittingness
categories by reference to the optimal policy: thus, it seems most natural to
say that choosing some state-action pair is a fitting response on the part of the
agent (given her self-interest) because it is a part of the optimal policy, and that
choosing some (locally good) state-action pair is not a fitting response because
it is not a part of the optimal policy. Reason-related categories would seem not
to apply to state-action pairs.
Similarly to state-action pairs, policies can be made sense of in terms of eval-
uative, deontic, and fittingness categories. Thus, we can say that some policies
are good, bad, the best, the worst, right, wrong, justified, fitting, or unfitting for
the agent (given her self-interests). Notice that we judge a policy as (un)fitting
by reference to the reward function and the general aim of maximizing the signal:
the optimal strategy is fitting (or justified) insofar and because it maximizes the
signal associated with the reward function.
Next, we consider the reward signal. Given that it is gradable, it cannot be
made sense of in terms of nongradable normative categories. This means that
we should not be making sense of reward signals in terms of any of the deontic
categories, nor any of the fittingness ones. This leaves us with two candidate
classes: the evaluative and the reason-based. We can try to make sense of reward
signals in terms of the core reason-based categories of being a reason for/against:


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
13
Thus, we can say that the fact that the reward signal associated with some state-
action pair (s, a) is a negative real is a reason against a in state s. Similarly, we
can say that this fact is also a reason against any policy that includes (s, a). We
can also say that the reward signal associated with some other state-action pair
(s′, a′) is a positive real is a reason for a′ in s′. Similarly, we can say that this
fact is also a reason for any policy that includes (s′, a′).
We register two problems with making sense of reward signals using reason-
based categories: First, we should expect that, in many cases, there will be
multiple reasons for and against the same action, not one. (This problem is less
worrisome in a stochastic setting, where selecting an action in a state can lead
to different outcomes and rewards. Also, it is not a problem when we think of
reward signals as reasons for/against policies.) Second and more importantly,
given that standardly both prudential and other normative reasons (promises,
harms, etc.) are taken to come in different kinds, we should expect reasons to be
something more than mere numbers, which can always be added up.
Alternatively, we can try to make sense of the reward signals in terms of eval-
uative categories. Above we saw that state-action pairs can be said to be good,
bad, better, worse, etc. (for the agent). Accordingly, a positive reward signal can
be thought of as the amount of (hitherto unspecified) goodness associated with a
given state-action pair—and by extension, policy—and a negative reward signal
can be thought of as the amount of (hitherto unspecified) badness associated
with a given state-action pair—and by extension, policy. Presumably, the good-
ness here is some (still unspecified) positive value and the badness is some (still
unspecified) negative value. If so, then of all the ideas relating to evaluative cat-
egories we discussed, reward signals most closely relate to goodness and badness
in a respect. What is strange, however, is that there is only one respect in which
actions can be good and only one respect in which they can be bad. Contrast this
with the following case: you are choosing between smoking a cigarette or going
for a run. Smoking is good for you insofar as it gives you immediate pleasure
but bad for you insofar as it has a negative effect on your health. Going for a
run, in turn, is bad for you insofar as it causes physical discomfort but also good
for you insofar as it has a positive effect on your health. Clearly, the issue here
runs parallel to what we saw when making sense of the rewards signal in terms
of reason-based categories.
Notice that the reward function served as a basis for the (normative) domain
of prudence. This function, together with the implicit call to maximize, gave us
a standard, against the backdrop of which we could apply normative categories
to various components of the RL system. It also pays to note how we would
use the term ‘rational’ in this context: we can talk about (more or less) rational
actions and (more or less) rational behavior. However, all of these would seem to
be derivative from what we might call the “(most) rational policy” (or “policies”):
the policy that is best, that is right, and that is fitting (given the RL agent’s
self-interests), or the policy that maximizes the reward signal.
Now we turn to the moral domain. From the perspective of metanormative
theory, it is a separate domain that has a similar structure to that of self-interest,


14
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
but is also independent: at times, what is best for an agent given her self-interests
is morally bad—or vice versa—and what the agent rationally (or prudentially)
ought to do is exactly what the agent morally ought not to do—or vice versa. How
should one represent the moral domain in an RL system? The most natural and
conservative answer runs thus: exactly the way we represented and made sense
of the domain of self-interest. Accordingly, the first thing one needs is a distinct
reward function that can serve as a basis for the moral domain. Against the
backdrop of such a function, the normative categories apply to the components
of an RL system in just the way they apply against the backdrop of a reward
function representing self-interest. Thus, state-action pairs and policies can be
made sense of in terms of deontic, evaluative, and fitting categories, and reward
signals can be made sense of in terms of reason-based and evaluative categories.
Notably, with respect to reward signals, we encounter the same problems: the
setup allows for only one kind of moral reason or one kind of respect in which
actions or policies can be morally good. The use of the term ‘moral’ should
run parallel to what we saw with ‘rational’ above. We can elliptically talk about
(more/less) moral actions and (more/less) moral behavior. However, these would
be derivative from what we might call the “(most) moral policy” (or “policies”):
the policy that is morally best, morally right, and morally fitting, or the policy
that maximizes the (moral) reward signal.
Table 2. Applying normative categories to the components of RL.
Deontic Evaluative Fittingness Reason-based
State-action pairs, locally
✓
✓
✓
State-action pairs, globally
✓
✓
✓
Policies
✓
✓
✓
Reward signals
✓
✓
Before leaving this section, we summarize the way normative categories map
onto the components of (basic) RL systems in Table 2.
6
Three Illustrative Examples
We contend that the theoretical framework developed above can be used to
evaluate the promise of particular proposals for using RL to further the goals of
machine ethics and value alignment. We do not have the space for a comprehen-
sive analysis in this paper, but we can consider three illustrative examples.
Abel et al. In an early paper, Abel et al. [1] “argue that reinforcement learning
achieves the appropriate generality required to theorize about an idealized ethical
artificial agent, and [that it] offers the proper framework for grounding specific
questions about ethical learning and decision making...”. They formalize “ethical
learning and decision-problems” as solving partially observable Markov decision


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
15
processes (POMDPs) and advance their claims by analyzing two toy “ethical
dilemmas”. We focus on the first of these: “Cake or Death”. The POMDP that
Abel et al. work with involves a “a single ‘true’ ethical utility function” which
the agent can identify only through indirect observation (which is standard for
POMDPs). Cake or Death is meant to model a situation in which the artificial
agent is uncertain whether it is “ethical” to bake cakes for people or, rather, kill
people. The POMPD contains three states: cake, death, and the terminal end.
In each of the nonterminal states, the agent can perform one of three actions:
kill three people (kill), bake a cake for them (bake_cake), or ask a companion
which action is ethical (ask). Performing either of the first two actions leads
to the terminal state, while asking leads to the same state, while revealing the
rewards to the agent: R(bake, bake_cake) = 1 and R(death, kill) = 3. Abel et al.
consider three policies: immediately selecting bake_cake; immediately selecting
kill; and first asking what is ethical and then selecting bake_cake in cake and kill
in death. They observe that, insofar as the third policy has the highest expected
utility (given a uniform prior), it is also optimal and take this observation to
suffice for the conclusion that the RL agent can identify the “sensible” policy.
It is not clear how Abel et al. think of the state where killing the three people
leads to high reward: they might think of it as somehow representing a merely
epistemic possibility or as part of a deliberately comic example. Either way, given
our analysis from Section 5, what they say implies that killing the three people
is the morally best/right thing to do. By extension, killing the three people (in
that state) is also part of any policy that is morally best, right, and fitting.
Given our analysis, a notable strength of the approach of Abel et al. is that
it works with a reward function (their “true ethical utility function”) that serves
as the cornerstone of the moral domain, and that makes it meaningful to apply
moral categories in this context and classify a behavior as moral. On the negative
side, the “sensible” policy that the RL agent ends learns is only one of the morally
optimal policies. So, insofar as the goal was to show that RL can be used to
reliably identify moral policies and induce moral behavior, it has not been met.
Furthermore, the fact that the policy that the RL agent learns is moral appears to
be incidental, as it is “sensible” insofar as it maximizes expected reward signal.
The phrase “sensible moral policy” might naturally suggest that the policy in
question leads to moral behavior. But given our analysis, the behavior is moral
if its underlying policy is morally good, right, or fitting, and the question of
whether a policy is morally good, right, or fitting has little to do with maximizing
expected reward signal (as opposed to maximizing moral reward signal). The final
and less significant point of criticism is that the moral theory that Abel et al. use
in the example is very odd. Its odd character can be brought out by constructing
an analogous case concerning self-interest: In it, the agent is uncertain between
whether it is rational to eat nutritious food or commit suicide, and it learns
the “sensible” policy of first asking what is rational and then eating nutritious
food in one state and committing suicide in the other. The example implies that
committing suicide is the rationally best/right thing to do, and that it is part of
any policy that is best, right, and fitting, given the agent’s self-interests.


16
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
Noothigattu et al. Most RL-based approaches in value alignment envision an
agent aiming to maximize some (nonmoral) reward under ethical (or other nor-
mative) constraints. One representative example is the work of Noothigattu et al.
[32] who try to teach AI agents “ethical values” with the help of RL and “policy
orchestration”. Their approach has three main components. The first is meant to
help the agent learn constraints: first, IRL is used on demonstrations exhibiting
desired behavior with the view of learning “constrained rewards”, and then RL
is used on these rewards to learn a “strongly constrained” (or ethical) policy πC.
The second component uses standard RL to learn a “domain reward maximiz-
ing” policy πR. Finally, the third component is an algorithm that “orchestrates”
the two policies, choosing one of them to play at each point in time. In [32],
Noothigattu et al. illustrate the approach using the classic Pac-Man game. More
specifically, they show that Pac-Man can do well in the game, while not eating
any ghosts—presumably, the idea is that Pac-Man’s behavior is ethical insofar as
it does not eat ghosts. In the standard setup, that is, the setup in which Pac-Man
learns the domain reward maximizing policy πR, the rewards were as follows: +10
for eating a dot; +500 for eating all dots; −500 for colliding with a “unscared”
ghost; and +200 for eating a “scared” ghost. And the (raw) rewards that were
learned through IRL from the demonstrations and used for the constrained policy
πC, in turn, were as follows: +.00284, +0.5507, −0.97059, −0.23434. Noothigattu
et al. note that the weight corresponding to eating ghosts (i.e. −0.97059) makes
it clear that “eating ghosts strongly violates the favorable constraints” (p. 6380).
Then they explain how the two policies πC and πR get mixed by the orchestra-
tor, and how varying the hyperparamater controlling the trade-off between them
results in Pac-Man either not eating ghosts or obtaining more points.
One might be tempted to call πC the “ethical” or “moral policy” (which
Noothigattu et al. themselves do not do but seem to imply). However, given
our analysis, we cannot talk about morally good/bad, right/wrong, etc. actions
and morally good/bad, right/wrong, etc. policies here at all, because there is
no moral reward function that could serve as the cornerstone for the moral
domain. Furthermore, while the rewards that are used to obtain πR pertain to
one domain—and hence, πR can be called the “rational policy”—the rewards
underlying πC blend domain rewards with (intended) moral penalties, creating
a domain that is different from both that of morality and that of rationality. This
means that there is no principled basis for the application of moral categories in
this context. And from this, there is no basis for classifying behavior as moral.
Though the aim of constraining an RL agent that maximizes domain reward
signal is clear, in the setup of Noothigattu et al. the boundary between morality
and rationality gets blurred, and so it is not clear how to even apply moral
categories here.
Rodriguez-Soto et al. In a series of papers [35–37], culminating with [36],
Rodriguez-Soto et al. use multi-objective RL in the context of value alignment.
They work with multi-objective Markov decision processes (MOMDPs) that in-
clude a vector of reward functions where each function corresponds to a different


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
17
“value”. Notably, all of these values are meant to be “ethical”, with one of them,
the “value of achievement”, representing the agent’s “individual objective”. The
authors assume that these values form a “value system” or that they are totally
ordered. They also assume that the value of achievement is never the top el-
ement in the value ordering. Since the values are totally ordered, they induce
a lexicographic ordering on the rewards. So, an RL agent functioning in such
an MOMDP learns to maximize the reward signal associated with the highest
value, then with the second to highest value, and so on. Rodriguez-Soto et al.
[36] prove some important results about this setup and design some insightful
experiments, which are too complex to be discussed here.
This kind of setup is much better aligned with our analysis and metanor-
mative theory: Policies that maximize a vector of reward functions representing
ethical values are straightforward to make sense of in terms (deontic, evaluative,
and fittingness) moral categories. Furthermore, the fact that there are now mul-
tiple reward functions goes some way toward resolving the issue with interpreting
reward signals in terms of reasons/goodness in a respect: if there are multiple
reward signals, we can talk about different moral reasons for actions/policies,
or alternatively, different respects in which actions/policies can be good. What
is unusual. That being said, the setup of Rodriguez-Soto et al. has at least two
limitations. First, due to the fact that the reward functions, or “values”, are to-
tally ordered, the relative importance of reasons/respects of goodness is uniform.
And this goes against the received wisdom in metanormative theory and other
areas of philosophy. Here we may recall the drowning child scenario. While in it,
the child’s welfare was more important than keeping the promise, the received
wisdom in philosophy is that, in other situations, the relative importance of
these moral factors might be reversed. The second limitation concerns the value
of achievement and its place in the value ordering. While Rodriguez-Soto et al.
treat it as an ethical value, from the perspective of metanormative theory, it
is much more natural to think of it as something that does not belong to the
moral domain, but rather to the domain of self-interest. Thus, it is much more
natural to think of it as a nonethical value. Now recall that the vector of reward
functions corresponding to ethical values can be seen as giving rise to the moral
domain. In light of this, the artificial agent would be naturally seen as selecting
the most rational policy among the moral ones if the value of achievement were
always the least element in the value ordering. But as long as it is allowed to
be higher in the ordering, the artificial agent is naturally seen to be designed
to, at least sometimes, resolve trade-offs between more moral and more rational
policies in favor of the more rational ones.
Much more could be said about these three approaches—Table 3 summarizes
their strengths and weaknesses—and there are many other RL-based approaches
that deserve careful analysis. However, for reasons of space, such an analysis
must be left for another day. We hope that this section has illustrated how the
perspective of metanormative theory on RL can be used to evaluate and also
compare competing RL-based approaches to machine ethics and value alignment.


18
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
Table 3. Strengths and Weaknesses of the Three Approaches.
Approach
Strengths
Main Weaknesses
Abel et al.
[1]
The use of a “true ethical
utility function” makes it
meaningful to apply moral
categories.
The agent learns only one of the morally
optimal policies; the fact that it is moral
is incidental; the agent’s sole goal is to act
morally.
Noothigattu
et al. [32]
The RL agent has a goal
besides acting morally.
There is no principled basis for the appli-
cation of moral categories and classifying a
behavior as moral.
Rodriguez-
Soto et al.
[36]
A
vector
of
functions
makes it meaningful to ap-
ply moral categories and
makes room for different
kinds of moral factors.
The relative importance of moral factors
is context-invariant; the characterization of
the function associated with achievement
as moral is dubious; the agent is sometimes
trained to behave immorally.
7
Conclusion
This paper set out to contribute to meeting the challenge of designing agents
that avoid moral evil and foster moral good. To this end, we provided a brief
introduction to metanormative theory and its treatment of morality and other
normative domains. We introduced the core normative categories, along with
some other ideas that are central to this area. We also discussed the way these
ideas apply to the RL architecture, as well as illustrated how the perspective of
metanormative theory can be used as a criterion for evaluating and comparing
approaches to machine ethics and value alignment. We are not suggesting that
this criterion should be decisive. However, we do think that, ceteris paribus, an
approach’s promise increases with the extent to which it can be understood in
terms of notions from metanormative theory.
Acknowledgments. We thank the participants of EMAS 2026 and the work-
shop Opportunities and Limitations of Artificial Moral Agents, which took place
in Utrecht in March 2026, for feedback on the material presented here. We also
thank David Streit and the three anonymous referees for EMAS 2026 whose
written comments have led to major improvements in this paper. Knoks was
supported by the Luxembourg National Research Fund through the project The
Epistemology of AI Systems (C22/SC/17111440/EAI).
Disclosure of Interests. The authors have no competing interests.
References
1. Abel, D., MacGlashan, J., Littman, M.L.: Reinforcement learning as a framework
for ethical decision making. In: AAAI Workshop: AI, Ethics, and Society (2016)


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
19
2. Alcaraz, B., Knoks, A., Streit, D.: Estimating weights of reasons using meta-
heuristics: A hybrid approach to machine ethics. In: Proceedings of the Seventh
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES-2024). pp. 27–38. ACM
Press (2024)
3. Anderson, M., Anderson, S.L.: The status of machine ethics: A report from the
AAAI Symposium. Minds and Machines 17(1), 1–10 (2007)
4. Anderson, M., Anderson, S.L. (eds.): Machine Ethics. Cambridge University Press
(2011)
5. Baker, D.: The varieties of normativity. In: The Routledge Handbook of Metaethics.
Routledge (2017)
6. Baker, D.: Skepticism about ought simpliciter. In: Shafer-Landau, R. (ed.) Oxford
Studies in Metaethics 13. Oxford University Press (2018)
7. Bello, P., Malle, B.F.: Computational approaches to morality. In: Sun, R. (ed.)
Cambridge Handbook of Computational Cognitive Sciences, pp. 1037–1063. Cam-
bridge University Press (2023)
8. Berker, S.: Particular reasons. Ethics 118(1), 109–139 (2007)
9. Berker, S.: The deontic, the evaluative, and the fitting. In: Rowland, R.A. (ed.) Fit-
tingness: Essays in the Philosophy of Normativity. Oxford University Press (2022)
10. Biran, O., Cotton, C.: Explanation and justification in machine learning: A survey.
In: IJCAI-17 Workshop on Explainable AI (XAI). vol. 8, pp. 8–13 (2017)
11. Brown, J.: On scepticism about ought simpliciter. Australasian Journal of Philos-
ophy 102(2), 497–511 (2024)
12. Canavotto, I., Horty, J.: Piecemeal knowledge acquisition for computational norma-
tive reasoning. In: Proceedings of the 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society (AIES-2022). pp. 171–80. ACM Press (2022)
13. Chan, A., Salganik, R., Markelius, A., Pang, C., Rajkumar, N., Krasheninnikov,
D., et al.: Harms from increasingly agentic algorithmic systems. In: Proceedings
of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. p.
651–666. FAccT ’23, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA
(2023)
14. Conitzer, V.: Why should we ever automate moral decision making? (2024),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07671
15. Conitzer, V., Freedman, R., Heitzig, J., Holliday, W.H., Jacobs, B.M., Lambert,
N., et al.: Social choice for AI alignment: Dealing with diverse human feedback.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10271 (2024)
16. Dancy, J.: Moral Reasons. Blackwell (1993)
17. Eschmann, J.: Reward function design in reinforcement learning. In: Belousov, B.,
Abdulsamad, H., Klink, P., Parisi, S., Peters, J. (eds.) Reinforcement Learning
Algorithms: Analysis and Applications, pp. 25–33. Springer (2021)
18. Faroldi, F.L.G.: Reasons-based artificial agents. AI Ethics 6(77) (2026)
19. Floridi, L., Sanders, J.: On the morality of artificial agents. Minds and Machines
14(3), 349–379 (2004)
20. Gabriel, I.: Artificial Intelligence, values, and alignment. Minds and Machines
30(3), 411–437 (2020)
21. Hidalgo, C.A., Orghian, D., Canals, J.A., de Almeida, F., Martin, N.: How Humans
Judge Machines. The MIT Press (2021)
22. Howard, C., Cosker-Rowland, R.: Fittingness: A user’s guide. In: Howard, C.,
Cosker-Rowland, R. (eds.) Fittingness. Oxford University Press (2022)
23. Howard, C.: Fittingness. Philosophy Compass 13(11), e12542 (2018)
24. Ji, J., Qiu, T., Chen, B., Zhang, B., Lou, H., Wang, K., et al.: AI alignment: A
comprehensive survey (2025), http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19852, arXiv:2310.19852


20
A. Knoks and M. Slavkovik
25. Kagan, S.: Normative Ethics. Westview Press (1998)
26. Kauppinen, A.: Review of Getting Things Right: Fittingness, Reasons, and Value,
by Conor McHugh and Jonathan Way The Range of Reasons in Ethics and Epis-
temology, by Daniel Whiting. Mind 134(536), 1164–1173 (2025)
27. Lord, E., Maguire, B.: An opinionated guide to the weight of reasons. In: Lord, E.,
Maguire, B. (eds.) Weighing Reasons, pp. 3–24. Oxford University Press (2016)
28. McHugh, C., Way, J.: Fittingness first. Ethics 126(3), 575–606 (2016)
29. McHugh, C., Way, J.: Getting Things Right: Fittingness, Reasons, and Value.
Oxford University Press (2023)
30. Montes, N., Osman, N., Sierra, C., Slavkovik, M.: Value engineering for au-
tonomous agents (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.08759
31. Ng, A.Y., Russell, S.J.: Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In: Proceed-
ings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning. p. 663–670.
ICML ’00, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA (2000)
32. Noothigattu, R., Bouneffouf, D., Mattei, N., Chandra, R., Madan, P., Varshney,
K.R., et al.: Teaching AI agents ethical values using reinforcement learning and
policy orchestration. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-19. pp. 6377–6381 (2019)
33. Parfit, D.: On What Matters (Volume I). Oxford University Press (2011)
34. Raz, J.: Practical reason and norms. Oxford University Press (1990)
35. Rodriguez-Soto, M., Lopez-Sanchez, M., Rodriguez-Aguilar, J.A.: Multi-objective
reinforcement learning for designing ethical multi-agent environments. Neural
Computing and Applications 37, 25619–25644 (2023)
36. Rodriguez-Soto, M., Rădulescu, R., Bistaffa, F., Ricart, O., Mayoral, A., Lopez-
Sanchez, M., et al.: Multi-objective reinforcement learning for provably incentivis-
ing alignment with value systems. Artificial Intelligence (2026)
37. Rodriguez-Soto, M., Serramia, M., Lopez-Sanchez, M., Rodriguez-Aguilar, J.A.:
Instilling moral value alignment by means of multi-objective reinforcement learn-
ing. Ethics and Information Technology 24(9) (2022)
38. Russell, S., Norvig, P.: Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pearson Edu-
cation, 4 edn. (2020)
39. Sayre-McCord, G.: Metaethics. In: Zalta, E.N., Nodelman, U. (eds.) The Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
Spring 2023 edn. (2023)
40. Scanlon, T.M.: What We Owe to Each Other. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press (1998)
41. Schroeder, M.: Reasons First. Oxford University Press (2021)
42. Shafer-Landau, R.: The Fundamentals of Ethics. Oxford University Press (2012)
43. Singer, P.: Famine, affluence, and morality. Philosophy and Public Affairs 1(3),
229–43 (1972)
44. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. A Bradford
Book, Cambridge, MA, USA (2018)
45. Tucker, C.: Weighing reasons. In: Zalta, E.N., Nodelman, U. (eds.) The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Win-
ter 2025 edn. (2025)
46. Väyrynen, P.: Normative explanation and justification. Noûs 55(1), 3–22 (2021)
47. Väyrynen, P.: Varieties of normative explanation. In: Copp, D., Rosati, C. (eds.)
The Oxford Handbook of Metaethics. Oxford University Press (forthcoming)
48. Vishwanath, A., Dennis, L.A., Slavkovik, M.: Reinforcement learning and machine
ethics: A systematic review (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.02425


Metanormative Theory for RL-Based Moral Agents
21
49. Wallach, W., Allen, C.: Moral Machines: Teaching Robots Right from Wrong.
Oxford University Press, Inc., USA (2008)
50. Wallach, W., Allen, C., Smit, I.: Machine morality: Bottom-up and top-down ap-
proaches for modelling human moral faculties. AI & SOCIETY 22(4), 565–582
(2008)
51. Whiting, D.: The Range of Reasons: In Ethics and Epistemology. Oxford University
Press (2022)
52. Zhong, T., Song, Y., Limarga, R., Pagnucco, M.: Computational machine ethics:
A survey. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 82 (2025)
