Title: Agentic Artificial Intelligence for Power Systems: Strategies to Identify and Close Capability Gaps

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28822v1

Published Time: Mon, 03 Aug 2026 00:11:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# Agentic Artificial Intelligence for Power Systems: Strategies to Identify and Close Capability Gaps 

Eve Tsybina 

Oak Ridge National Laboratory 

Oak Ridge, TN, USA tsybinae@ornl.gov 

Samim Konjicija 

University of Sarajevo 

Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina skonjicija@etf.unsa.ba 

Slaven Peles 

Oak Ridge National Laboratory 

Oak Ridge, TN, USA peless@ornl.gov 

Abstract —The rapid expansion of AI-driven information in-frastructure, particularly data centers, is placing unprecedented pressure on power systems and accelerating the pace at which new assets must interconnect with the grid. As bulk transmission expansion rolls out slowly, new loads and generation are in-creasingly deployed within existing network constraints. Agentic AI is urgently needed to automate the numerous and repetitive connection processes, but its maturity has not been systematically validated on complex tasks and large-scale systems. We replicate the current state of the art in agentic AI for power systems planning and evaluate it against a structured suite of nodal planning problems spanning six levels of task complexity and four grid scales. We find that only the two lowest complexity levels are solvable on some of the test grid sizes, and identify the specific capability upgrades required to close this gap. Adopting stricter testing protocols and reproducible evaluation benchmarks is essential for assessing both genuine progress and the operational readiness of agentic AI. 

Index Terms —agentic artificial intelligence, grid planning. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

AI-driven information economy, particularly data center expansion, is placing significant pressure on power systems. According to Q4 2025 S&P Global Market Intelligence report [1], data centers have added 43.8 GW of utility load in the United States, 1.3 GW in Canada, and 7.8 GW in Europe over the past five years. An additional 114.2 GW in the U.S. are planned for deployment during 2026–2030, 16.2 GW in the EU and 3.7 GW in Canada. This rapid load growth is outpacing expansion in generation and transmission, leading to a more congested and more localized grid. New load pockets emerge, and part of the grid that previously operated as a single area may split into multiple constrained subareas. While grid expansion or reinforcements are frequently discussed, they remain a slow, long-term process. Experience from regions with coordinated transmission planning, such as the EU and China [2], [3], shows that planning and construction of bulk grid transmission infrastructure takes decades. In the context of the AI race and in decentralized investment environments like the U.S., investors are unlikely to wait for grid upgrades. Instead, development proceeds within existing constraints, 

This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The publisher acknowledges the US government license to provide public access under the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-publicaccess-plan). 

adding load or “own” generation where possible, deferring as-set retirements, and relying on minimal network modifications [4], [5]. The practical baseline is therefore that new assets – loads, generation, or grid-support devices – must connect within large-scale grids while assuming the grid as constant and re-lying on nodal studies to find feasible locations. This requires agentic AI to operate at both high resolution and interconnec-tion scale grids. Such operation encompasses a broad class of engineering problems, which can be well represented by, for example, a connection study, or a local substation upgrade study. There is a growing body of research on agentic AI rising to the challenge [6]–[10]. However, it is unknown at this point whether existing level of agentic development can support the necessary planning processes. As we are adopting agentic AI to copilot high performance power system software, we attempted to (a) understand the existing agentic AI efforts, as they are discussed in publicly available research, and (b) assess the extent to which agentic AI can solve nodal large scale planning problems. Based on published results, we developed our own AI agent prototype, assessed its performance, and identified immediate next steps for improvement. The resulting manuscript is structured as follows. Section II provides a survey of existing agentic AI literature. Section III discusses the experimental methodology for agentic AI pro-filing. Section IV discusses the efforts taken to replicate the state of the art agentic performance, and presents test results. Section V summarizes our findings and outlines directions for future research. II. S TATE OF THE ART SURVEY 

We focus on agentic AI products, known as ”copilots” that can operate with both, physics-based and AI inference models. Other applications of AI include generative models for visualization [11] and foundational models aimed to replace state estimators or physics-based simulation [12], [13]. For more information about different uses of large language model (LLM) and generative AI in power systems see reviews in [14]–[16]. Perhaps the best description of architecture and workflow fundamentals of LLM instruments for power sys-tems can be found in [9]. It is hard to provide a comprehensive literature review in a fast-growing research space, as new products appear every day. arXiv:2607.28822v1 [eess.SY] 30 Jul 2026 There is an increasing number of conceptual research papers and frameworks. Simultaneously, few studies report the results of deploying actual agents, and even fewer disclose code for verification. As of June 2026, we identified five grid-specific agentic AI solutions (Table I). Based on the available information, all of the discussed agentic AI tools share the same fundamental elements:  

> •

storage for registering power system state;  

> •

storage with retrieval augmented generation (RAG) helpers that allow the AI to understand industry language and inform specific tasks;  

> •

solver interface that feeds data into power flow models such as alternating current optimal power flow (ACOPF);  

> •

executor module that issues commands to adjust the state and run the simulations;  

> •

context module that saves results of earlier iterations to inform new iterations;  

> •

validator and summary module that interprets results. The only exception is [10], which did not go as far as executing commands. All the referenced AI agents are reported to be capable of solving basic problems on small grids. Examples of problems include:  

> •

“Solve IEEE test case” [8];  

> •

“Increase load in bus 10 to 150 MW” [8];  

> •

“Increase load to 101%” [6]. More complex tasks such as resolving contingency by grid switching reveal some problems in developing and adjusting respective agents. For instance, GridAgent [7] reports that a separate agent is needed for each separate type of contingency resolution. PowerAgent [6] similarly reports generalization is-sues. This is also found in non-agentic, generative AI research studies that deal with linguistic interpretation, and general LLM studies investigating RAG usage [10], [12], [18]. System size and resulting token cost is another specific problem found in agentic studies [6]. A close analysis of agen-tic solutions indicates that the problem is probably partially attributed to the use of JSON files. JSON format is used by all major AI vendors to send and receive data. It uses deep nesting, repeating keys, parses slowly, and is not memory efficient compared to other input types. A large JSON file can take hundreds of thousands of tokens to convey information to the LLM. It was also shown [7] that large systems exceed the context capacity of vendor LLMs, making it impossible for the model to retain a description of the entire system. Often, “healthy” parts of the system are retained while in the model’s context while the parts requiring attention are dropped. Unfortunately, little is reported about the scaling of the agentic AI performance with the size of the power system problem and the change in agentic iteration requirements with the complexity of prompts. While [8] reports the absence of correlation between search time and system size, this finding may be misleading. There, authors use IEEE cases from Uni-versity of Washington archive [17], which are “copperplate” infinite transmission, infinite generation systems. Therefore an increase in the number of buses may not necessarily lead to an increase in the number of agent iterations or a significant increase in solution time. Since none of the referenced studies provides source data for the test cases, it is hard to tell if the adopted systems were closer to “copperplate” systems, or to realistic congestible systems. The latter would require more iterations and more time to find the feasible solution. The absence of clear verifiable code is the main barrier to understanding the genuine ability of the proposed agents to perform the required power system simulations. We attempt to replicate the state of the art code as discussed in the next section, and test it against a more demanding set of tasks and grid scales. III. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

A. Analysis parameters 

Assessing the operational readiness of agentic AI is difficult because few research results have been documented in suffi-cient detail. Nevertheless, the results published so far suggest that the community is converging on the common design prin-ciples discussed in section II. This trend allows us to construct a “generic” agent and evaluate its performance on tasks of increasing complexity. Our agent is based on a development snapshot of AgentiGrid, an AI agent integrated with the high-performance computing (HPC) power flow analysis package ExaGO [19]. It incorporates all of the agentic AI elements discussed in section II and closely reflects the state of the art described in the literature. The source code is available at [19]. Next, we design the test cases. A comprehensive assessment of agentic AI across the full range of connection study tasks would require simulations spanning many design choices, including the LLM vendor, the grid size, and the prompt design. Together, these choices span a prohibitively large experimental space. As a first approximation, we therefore restrict our study to the following design: 

2 vendors × 6 prompts × 4 grid sizes × 10 attempts == 480 simulations. We select two vendors from different regions, DeepSeek and OpenAI, leaving other vendors such as Anthropic (Claude) and Google (Gemini) to future work. The second design choice is grid size. Since the largest systems reported in the literature are on the order of 100–200 buses, and system size may affect AI performance, we test four sizes: 100 buses (the state-of-the-art average), 1,000 buses (a mid-sized utility), 10,000 buses (a large transmission operator), and 100,000 buses (a stretch target representing a combined transmission and distribution system). We further use six prompts of increasing complexity, described in the next section. Finally, because LLM responses are not deterministic – repeating the same prompt may yield different answers – we allow 10 attempts per prompt to obtain a consistent answer. Each simulation records the AI’s search history, prompt response, token usage, analytics, and processing time. TABLE I COMPARISON OF GRID -S PECIFIC AGENTIC AI S OLUTIONS           

> Agent Use Cases Vendor Models Test System Code, data available
> PowerAgent (US, Harvard) 2025 [6] Deterministic OPF; N-1 contingencies: identify harmful contingencies; Load growth analysis Claude 4-, 7-, and 34-bus systems (exact source unknown) Code only Grid-Agent (Canada) 2025 [7] Contingency management through battery usage, load shed, or switch operation. Has continuous learning capability. gemini-2.5-pro, gemini-2.5-flash, gemini-2.5-flash-lite, gpt-4.1, gpt-4.1-mini, gpt-4.1-nano CIGRE MV (14-bus), IEEE 30, 69* No GridMind (US, Argonne) 2025 [8] Deterministic OPF; N-1 contingencies: identify harmful contingencies GPT-5, GPT-5-mini, GPT-5-nano, GPT-o3, GPT-o4-mini, Claude 4 Sonnet IEEE 14, 30, 118, 300 [17]** No LLM4OPF (Australia, Hong Kong) 2023 [9] EV charging control The Git repo contains extra applications not specified in the document GPT-4 and GPT-4 Vision Single bus system Yes GAIA (China, Hong Kong, Singapore) 2025 [10] Grid monitoring and operation, blackstart Does not interface with solvers LLaMA2, GPT-3.5, GPT-4 IEEE 14, 30, 57, 118* No * There are multiple versions of IEEE n-bus systems, some of them deviating significantly from the original one. The exact source and therefore the exact configuration of the test systems are unknown. ** The IEEE systems contained in [17] are ”copperplate” with infinite transmission and unlimited MW and MVar (+/-) generation. Unless explicitly modified, their behavior is close to a single bus system.

B. Experimental Grid and Scenarios 

To test the scalability of agentic AI for grid planning, we built grids of adjustable size by tiling copies of a 100-bus building block. The block is derived from the IEEE 118-bus three-area system [17], reduced to 100 buses to allow even size increments, and then adjusted, following the PNNL manual [20], to introduce transmission and generating-unit constraints. This adjustment is critical for testing: operating a grid that con-gests and has reactive power issues is disproportionately more complex than operating a “copperplate” grid. The adjusted grid (Fig. 1) is provided in the supplemental material.  

> Fig. 1. IEEE 118-bus grid adjusted for profiling.

Since the objective of this study is to test the ability of agentic AI to perform load and generation studies, we evaluate the agent with a set of prompts addressing optimal siting or hosting capacity, together with two key steady-state outcomes of a generation and load portfolio: grid congestion and hot reserve. Each prompt is assigned a difficulty level from 0 to 6, defined as the number of discrete operations the agent must perform to get from the base case to the final result. We call these operations hops. Each hop’s output is consumed by the next. Hops include constructing a candidate set (e.g., enumerating contingencies or identifying nearest neighbors), solving a case, evaluating feasibility, aggregating results (e.g., min/max/average), and selecting or filtering. For example, computing the system reserve margin from nameplate data is a single aggregation hop (Level 1); testing N-1 contingencies re-quires constructing, solving, and evaluating the single-element contingency set (Level 3); and testing N-2 contingencies adds two further hops to construct and solve the pairwise set (Level 5). Most prompts from [8] require no hops at all (Level 0). [Level 1] Please find all buses that can host a 100 MW, 10 MVar load / using transmission constrained ACOPF / assume that the feasibility criteria include: (1) bus voltage magnitude in p.u. between 0.9 and 1.1, (2) line MVA flow is within rate A limit. [Level 2] Please report the reactive adequacy of the system for a 100 MW, 50 Mvar generator connected to each bus in the system / using transmission constrained ACOPF / assume that reactive adequacy holds if a generator is capable of providing reactive power at Qmax while providing active power at Pmax .[Level 3] Please test all N-1 contingencies on 3 nearest neighbor buses after connecting a 50 MW load to bus ⟨bus number ⟩, indicate the passed and failed contingencies / con-tingencies include branch outage, generator outage, and load outage / assume nearest neighbors by hop count / assume that the feasibility criteria include: (1) bus voltage magnitude in p.u. between 0.9 and 1.1, (2) line MVA flow is within rate A limit. [Level 4] Please find the minimum feasible hot reserve in the system for N-1 contingencies / assuming that hot reserve is the difference between maximum MW of the units that have status “on” and scheduled MW output of the units that have status “on” / assume that the feasibility criteria include: (1) bus voltage magnitude in p.u. between 0.9 and 1.1, (2) line MVA flow is within rate A limit. [Level 5] Please test all N-2 contingencies on 3 nearest neighbor buses after connecting a 50 MW load to bus ⟨bus number ⟩, indicate the passed and failed contingencies / con-tingencies include branch outage, generator outage, and load outage / assume nearest neighbors by hop count / assume that the feasibility criteria include: (1) bus voltage magnitude in p.u. between 0.9 and 1.1, (2) line MVA flow is within rate A limit. [Level 6] Please test all N-2 contingencies on 3 nearest neighbor buses after connecting a 50 MW load to bus ⟨bus number ⟩ and suggest contingency relief measures / contingen-cies include branch outage, generator outage, and load outage / assume nearest neighbors by hop count / assume that the feasibility criteria include: (1) bus voltage magnitude in p.u. between 0.9 and 1.1, (2) line MVA flow is within rate A limit / assume the following relief measures, in the order of decreasing priority: transformer ratio change, generator redispatch, line switching, load curtailment. We used Claude Opus 4.8 to validate the prompts before submitting them to the agent and to aggregate the results of the agent’s reasoning. Because this model comes from a vendor other than the two under study, the prompt preprocessing and result postprocessing cannot bias the measured performance of either model. All the analyses were run on a workstation with Intel Core i7-11700F processor with 8 cores, and with 64 GB of RAM. IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The overall findings of our simulations confirm the results presented in the literature. As shown in table II, our agentic AI prototype handled prompts at the complexity level reported for existing agents. It also went beyond prompt difficulty Level 1, the current state of practice, to Level 2, suggesting that the industry-wide approach to storage, helpers, and interfaces can handle both basic screening tasks and more complex analytical tasks. Both configurations, one using a DeepSeek and the other an OpenAI LLM, attempted the easier prompts on small grids. The OpenAI configuration solved both prompts in all 10 attempts; the DeepSeek configuration solved the Level 1 prompt in 5 of 10 attempts and omitted the 10 MVar reactive load in the other 5, on both the 100-bus and 1,000-bus grids. In the failed attempts, the agent correctly diagnosed the omission and attempted a corrected sweep by adding the 10 MVar in the next iteration, but the cache fingerprinted the corrected sweep as identical to the flawed original and returned the cached results instead of re-solving. This indicates that the sweep cache key excludes the reactive-load parameter.                 

> TABLE II AGENTIC AI PERFORMANCE ON THE STATE OF THE ART GRIDS AND PROMPTS ,SHOWING NUMBERS OF SUCCESSFUL AND TOTAL ATTEMPTS .LLM Prompt Grid size (buses) 100 1,000 deepseek v4 pro [Level 1] Find all buses . . . 5/10 5/10 [Level 2] Report the reactive . . . 10/10 10/10 gpt 5.4 B [Level 1] Find all buses . . . 10/10 10/10 [Level 2] Report the reactive . . . 10/10 10/10

As a consequence, for 100-bus grids, correct attempts by OpenAI and DeepSeek spent about 17,000 tokens, but incorrect attempts by DeepSeek spent 27,000–39,000 tokens trying to revise the original incorrect numbers, with token costs scaling with the number of iterations. For the 1,000-bus grid, correct attempts used about 36,000–43,000 tokens, and incorrect ones between 57,000 and 78,000 tokens. Extra AI efforts, such as selecting the lowest-cost solution and making analytical recommendations, were not consistent with the numbers produced by the solver, for either vendor or any system. Even when the solver sweeps were implemented correctly, the AI did not pick the correct numbers from the solver outputs or did not reason correctly about the solutions. Our agentic AI prototype was unable to solve more complex prompts and larger cases. Problems exist for both larger grids and more complex prompts. While the precise causes and solutions are beyond the scope of this methodology study, we briefly report several findings that illustrate why the proposed advanced testing matters for developing better agentic AI. First, we examined why larger grids fail even at simple prompt levels (runs with 10,000- and 100,000-bus grids re-turned no results and are omitted from table II). The bottle-neck is the backend execution, not the LLM or the agentic architecture: in the code snapshot used for our experiments, each candidate evaluation deep-copied the network state and used linear lookups, giving a roughly O(N 2) sweep cost; in addition, the LLM payload enumerated all network elements and overflowed the context window. Both issues have been addressed in a more recent version of AgentiGrid, which now responds to Level 1 and 2 prompts on the 10,000-bus grid (results forthcoming); a memory bottleneck at 100,000 buses remains, which we expect to resolve via batched computations on a distributed memory hardware. Second, more complex prompts 3-6 failed to produce re-sults. They require a larger and more detailed set of helper functions and dictionaries: a function that iterates over buses and tests contingencies does not know how to resolve that contingency. This confirms the findings of [7] at a more advanced testing level. The agent starts failing immediately one level of difficulty above the one reported in [6], [7]. For difficulty Level 3, the OpenAI agent used considerably more tokens - 50,000-100,000, but did not produce any results. It never sent any contingencies into the solver. The iterations focused almost exclusively on identifying what constitutes a contingency and exploring the grid for nearby buses, branches, and other grid elements. DeepSeek added a 50 MW load to bus 77, and found it feasible. In one of the attempts, it identified tier-1 nearest neighbors (buses 69, 80, 82), and listed the contingencies that would need testing. The DeepSeek attempts used 160,000-170,000 tokens and 300-400 seconds. This di-rectly indicates that relying on the native capability of vendor AI with minimal RAG is not resulting in valid solutions. Expanding the number of helper dictionaries and functions is a dimension which cannot be addressed intensively, by the efficiency of code scripting, and has to addressed extensively, through more verbose RAG. V. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

This study offers an advanced testing methodology and demonstrates its effectiveness in revealing capability gaps and areas for improvement in agentic AI for power systems analysis. It introduces four grid sizes with tighter operational constraints, and six prompt levels of greater complexity, than those used in current best-practice testing of agentic AI. Applying these tests to the “generic best practice” agent exposed the need for more efficient backend code and for extensive, detailed RAG. Because code and data for existing agentic platforms are not publicly available, it is difficult to predict exactly how those agents would perform under the proposed framework. However, the framework provides im-mediate insights for developers of existing or new agentic AI into likely next steps and upcoming challenges in developing their products. The insights from this study and the literature suggest two further improvements to scalability and performance on complex tasks. First, the backend could be improved to enable larger system sizes, or the JSON-based storage and cache could be replaced altogether with a database solution such as PostgreSQL. Second, where RAG becomes prohibitively long and complex, moving away from vendor models in favor of a custom LLM trained specifically for engineering purposes may be preferable. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. De-partment of Energy. REFERENCES [1] S&P Global Market Intelligence, “Datacenters and energy report,” S&P Global Market Intelligence, Tech. Rep., 2025, subscription based. [2] Entso-e | planning the future grid - TYNDP. [Online]. Available: https://tyndp.entsoe.eu/ [3] G. Christoffersen, “The asian super grid in northeast asia and china’s belt and road initiative,” German Institute for International and Security Affairs, Tech. Rep., 2018. [4] “FERC technical conference regarding the challenge of resource ade-quacy in RTO and ISO regions,” Federal Energy Regulatory Commis-sion, Jun. 2025. [5] (2025, Nov.) Tech firms are building their own power plants. National Association of Manufacturers. Accessed 11/14/2025. [Online]. Available: https://nam.org/ tech-firms-are-building-their-own-power-plants-34960/ [6] Q. Zhang and L. Xie, “Poweragent: A road map toward agentic intel-ligence in power systems: Foundation model, model context protocol, and workflow,” IEEE Power and Energy Magazine , vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 93–101, 2025. [7] Y. Zhang, A. M. Saber, A. Youssef, and D. Kundur, “Grid-agent: An llm-powered multi-agent system for power grid control,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05702v3 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/html/2508.05702v3 [8] H. Jin, K. Kim, and J. Kwon, “Gridmind: Llms-powered agents for power system analysis and operations,” ser. SC Workshops ’25. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025, p. 560–568. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3731599.3767409 [9] C. Huang, S. Li, R. Liu, H. Wang, and Y. Chen, “Large foundation models for power systems,” arXiv , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07044 [10] Y. Cheng, H. Zhao, X. Zhou, J. Zhao, Y. Cao, C. Yang, and X. Cai, “A large language model for advanced power dispatch,” Scientific Reports ,vol. 15, no. 1, p. 8925, 2025. [11] S. Chaturvedi, S. Jin, S. Abhyankar, T. Thurber, K. Oikonomou, and N. Voisin, “Grid copilot: A large language model (llm) based framework for transforming long-term planning analyses,” in 2025 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM) , 2025, pp. 1–5. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/11225574 [12] S. L. Choi, R. Jain, C. Feng, P. Emami, H. Zhang, J. Hong, T. Kim, S. Park, F. Ding, M. Baggu et al. , “Generative ai for power grid operations,” National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO (United States), Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-5D00-91176, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://docs.nrel.gov/docs/fy25osti/91176.pdf [13] B. Cheng, A. Botterud, T. Levin, S. Nadarajah, D. Zhao, and J. Kwon, “Ai for the grid and ai on the grid: Implications, challenges and opportunities,” Argonne National Laboratory, Tech. Rep., February 2026. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.6315298 [14] F. Amjad, T. Kor˜ otko, and A. Rosin, “Review of llms applications in electrical power and energy systems,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 150 951– 150 969, 2025. [15] H. Mirshekali, M. Reza Shadi, F. Ghanadi Ladani, and H. Reza Shaker, “A review of large language models for energy systems: Applications, challenges, and future prospects,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 163 162– 163 188, 2025. [16] M. Kiasari and H. Aly, “Agentic artificial intelligence for smart grids: A comprehensive review of autonomous, safe, and explainable control frameworks,” Energies , vol. 19, no. 3, p. 617, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/19/3/617 [17] “IEEE 118-bus three-area test system,” University of Washington. [Online]. Available: https://labs.ece.uw.edu/pstca/ [18] Z. Yan and Y. Xu, “Real-time optimal power flow with linguistic stipulations: Integrating gpt-agent and deep reinforcement learning,” 

IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 4747–4750, 2024. [19] S. Peles, N. Koukpaizan, M. Alam, J. Hambrick, and E. Tsybina, “Exago v2,” [Computer Software] https://doi.org/10.11578/dc.20260223.2, 2026. [20] A. Anderson, S. Kincic, B. Jefferson, B. Mcgary, C. Fallon, D. Ciesiel-ski, J. Wenskovitch, and Y. Chen, “A real-time operations manual for the ieee 118 bus transmission model,” Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington 99354, Tech. Rep. PNNL-334996, 2022.